README.md, before:

# Row Level Security

<img alt="row-level-security logo" src="doc/images/row-level-security_128x128.png" style="float:left; padding:0px 10px 10px 10px;"/>

[![Build Status](https://github.com/exasol/row-level-security/actions/workflows/ci-build.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/exasol/row-level-security/actions/workflows/ci-build.yml)

[![Quality Gate Status](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security&metric=alert_status)](https://sonarcloud.io/dashboard?id=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security)

[![Security Rating](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security&metric=security_rating)](https://sonarcloud.io/dashboard?id=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security)
[![Reliability Rating](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security&metric=reliability_rating)](https://sonarcloud.io/dashboard?id=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security)
[![Maintainability Rating](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security&metric=sqale_rating)](https://sonarcloud.io/dashboard?id=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security)
[![Technical Debt](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security&metric=sqale_index)](https://sonarcloud.io/dashboard?id=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security)

[![Code Smells](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security&metric=code_smells)](https://sonarcloud.io/dashboard?id=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security)
[![Coverage](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security&metric=coverage)](https://sonarcloud.io/dashboard?id=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security)
[![Duplicated Lines (%)](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security&metric=duplicated_lines_density)](https://sonarcloud.io/dashboard?id=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security)
[![Lines of Code](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security&metric=ncloc)](https://sonarcloud.io/dashboard?id=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security)

Protect access to database tables on a per-row level based on roles and / or tenants.

## Features

Restrict access to rows (datasets) in tables to &hellip;

* set of roles
* tenants (owners)
* group of users
* combination of tenant and role
* combination of tenant and group

## Table of Contents

### Information for Users

* [User Guide](doc/user_guide/user_guide.md)
* [Tutorial](doc/user_guide/tutorial.md)
* [Changelog](doc/changes/changelog.md)
* [Dependencies](dependencies.md)

### Information for Contributors

Requirement, design documents and coverage tags are written in [OpenFastTrace](https://github.com/itsallcode/openfasttrace) format.

* [System Requirement Specification](doc/system_requirements.md)
* [Design](doc/design.md)

Commit message:

#115: Added deprecation warning for Java RLS.

README.md, after:

# Row Level Security

<img alt="row-level-security logo" src="doc/images/row-level-security_128x128.png" style="float:left; padding:0px 10px 10px 10px;"/>

[![Build Status](https://github.com/exasol/row-level-security/actions/workflows/ci-build.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/exasol/row-level-security/actions/workflows/ci-build.yml)

[![Quality Gate Status](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security&metric=alert_status)](https://sonarcloud.io/dashboard?id=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security)

[![Security Rating](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security&metric=security_rating)](https://sonarcloud.io/dashboard?id=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security)
[![Reliability Rating](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security&metric=reliability_rating)](https://sonarcloud.io/dashboard?id=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security)
[![Maintainability Rating](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security&metric=sqale_rating)](https://sonarcloud.io/dashboard?id=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security)
[![Technical Debt](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security&metric=sqale_index)](https://sonarcloud.io/dashboard?id=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security)

[![Code Smells](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security&metric=code_smells)](https://sonarcloud.io/dashboard?id=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security)
[![Coverage](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security&metric=coverage)](https://sonarcloud.io/dashboard?id=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security)
[![Duplicated Lines (%)](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security&metric=duplicated_lines_density)](https://sonarcloud.io/dashboard?id=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security)
[![Lines of Code](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security&metric=ncloc)](https://sonarcloud.io/dashboard?id=com.exasol%3Arow-level-security)

Protect access to database tables on a per-row level based on roles and / or tenants.

## Deprecation Warning

&#9888;

Please note that the Java-variant of Row-Level-Security is superseded by an [Lua RLS](https://github.com/exasol/row-level-security-lua). The Lua variant is faster and easier to install. It requires Exasol 7.1 or later though.

**Java RLS will be discontinued** with the [end of support for Exasol 7.0 on September 30th 2022](https://www.exasol.com/portal/display/DOWNLOAD/Exasol+Life+Cycle). The Lua variant is interface-compatible and can be used as a drop-in replacement.

## Features

Restrict access to rows (datasets) in tables to &hellip;

* set of roles
* tenants (owners)
* group of users
* combination of tenant and role
* combination of tenant and group

## Table of Contents

### Information for Users

* [User Guide](doc/user_guide/user_guide.md)
* [Tutorial](doc/user_guide/tutorial.md)
* [Changelog](doc/changes/changelog.md)
* [Dependencies](dependencies.md)

### Information for Contributors

Requirement, design documents and coverage tags are written in [OpenFastTrace](https://github.com/itsallcode/openfasttrace) format.

* [System Requirement Specification](doc/system_requirements.md)
* [Design](doc/design.md)
